You are listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wichita Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, click the link in the show notes or go to fbcwf.org.
Today's message comes from Senior Pastor Dr. Bob McCartney.
Welcome this morning.
Let's open our Bibles to Ecclesiastes chapter three.
That's better, yeah.
This morning we're going to talk about a passage of Scripture that has some familiarity to people who have read the Bible.
And so while I think we've read this, I'm not sure we fully understood it.
We're going to explore Ecclesiastes 3 this morning.
Welcome to those of you at Shepherd Campus, at West Campus, at 11 East.
And those of you who join us online or on television, we're glad that you're here.
And we'd love to have you here in person if you're joining us remotely.
But I do know this, that we have some people
who many of them were associated with either Shepherd Air Force Base or with MSU that we're only here in our city for a season and now they're somewhere else and I know that some of you watch us regularly and I have some wonderful friends who do that who are part of our church and so we're really glad that you join us either regularly or occasionally and glad that you guys tune in.
I read a sad article yesterday, Brad Arnold
The front man for the very popular rock band Three Doors Down passed away yesterday.
Three Doors Down was very...
Anybody remember Three Doors Down?
Anybody?
Yeah.
My children of the 90s remember Three Doors Down.
But very popular late 90s, early 2000s.
Brad Arnold actually wrote the song Kryptonite when he was 15 years old and he wrote it in a math class.
So, yeah, something good can come out of math class, I guess, you know?
Songs like It's Not My Time were very, very popular.
But the article was really compelling that I read because as their fame and popularity grew and the demands of touring grew, the rock and roll lifestyle took over.
for Brad Arnold.
He had been raised in a Christian home, but he started abusing alcohol in particular and some other things, but it was alcohol that really sort of put its hooks into him, and he became addicted to alcohol.
He made a friend, though, that was really trying to help him.
And interestingly enough, this friend had a very different musical style, but just loved Brad Arnold.
The guy's name was Charlie Daniels.
the country music fiddler.
And he loved Brad Arnold and he tried to help Brad Arnold.
As a matter of fact, he convinced him to go to rehab for his alcohol addiction and he would visit him regularly.
And when Brad Arnold left rehab, he left in different in two ways.
He left having, being able to cope with that addiction to alcohol and walking away from that and pushing it away, but he had embraced faith in Jesus Christ as his Lord and Savior.
And it really was life changing for him.
In the middle of his rock and roll concerts, now three doors down, never became a Christian band, okay?
They never played a D now.
They never played a 180 weekend.
But in the middle of his concerts, he would stop and he would tell people, Jesus loves you.
And you need to turn to Jesus.
I mean, he was passionate about that.
A couple of years ago, I think it was, he was diagnosed with kidney cancer.
And on Friday at the age of 47,
Brad Arnold passed away as a result of that.
And I have questions.
It almost seemed like Brad was living almost this problem free life when he was apart from God.
And then he turns to God and all of a sudden there are these problems.
There's this pain, there's this difficulty.
It just seems unfair.
Solomon told us last week that he had discovered that there was a problem of life without God.
amusement and achievement, the party or the paycheck will not fill the longing of our soul.
And we expect Solomon in what I would call take the easy way out in Ecclesiastes chapter three and say, the answer is life with God.
And while I would agree with that, there is also a problem of life with God.
And you're like, oh, what in the world could that possibly mean?
What could the problem of life with God be?
Well, here's something I want you to consider.
The Bible teaches we believe that God is sovereign.
He is in control.
We believe and the Bible tells us that God loves us and we believe that God is wise.
If God is in control and if God loves me and if God is wise, why do these terrible, horrible, awful things happen?
Why does life sometimes feel so unfair?
Why is there injustice?
Why are people mistreated?
Why am I mistreated?
We ask that very personally sometimes.
And Solomon is going to dive in and answer some of the most honest and hardest questions of life in this passage.
Now he's going to begin with Hebrew poetry.
That's what the first eight verses of this passage are.
It's a poem.
Now, it doesn't rhyme in English.
That's not the point.
It's called Amirism.
Amirism is when a writer in any genre takes two extremes to illustrate everything in the middle.
So when you read the contrast that he makes in these first eight verses,
He's trying to say this encompasses everything in between in life.
So let's read this passage together and then I want to make four comments, four statements that I think are incredibly important for us to embrace.
Ecclesiastes chapter three, verse one, there is an occasion for everything and a time for every activity under heaven.
A time to give birth and a time to die.
A time to plant and a time to uproot.
A time to kill and a time to heal.
A time to tear down and a time to build.
A time to weep and a time to laugh.
A time to mourn and a time to dance.
A time to throw stones and a time to gather stones.
A time to embrace and a time to avoid embracing.
A time to search.
and a time to count as lost, a time to keep, and a time to throw away, a time to tear, and a time to sow, a time to be silent, and a time to speak, a time to love, and a time to hate, a time for war, and a time for peace.
And I'm going to move on past that passage in just a few minutes, but if you want to keep your Bibles open.
But let's talk about what Solomon is trying to help us understand in this passage.
Solomon wants us to understand that first and foremost that this passage is about the sovereignty of God.
The sovereignty of God means that God is in control.
When he says that there is an occasion for everything,
and a time for every activity.
The word there is literally, it could be translated an appointed time that God has established a time for everything.
It is all under his command and it is all under his control.
So the first statement I want us to leave with today and understand is this, God's plan is wise.
So even bad things have a purpose.
There is an appointed time for everything.
Now remember in this mirism where he takes sort of the extreme bookends of activities and everything that kind of in between falls in there.
He's going to give us several contrasts and some of them are just evident.
I mean, there is a time to be born and there is a time to die.
That is evident.
And God has established that.
You are not born at the wrong time.
You were born in God's time.
Now there are, I'm not going to explore every single one of these because some of them, they kind of make sense to us.
But I do want to point out a few of them.
First of all, I need to point out in verse three, he says, there is a time to kill and a time to heal.
And I have looked at that before and I've been a bit puzzled about it.
And maybe some of you are like, there's a time to kill.
Yes, there is.
There is on two fronts.
First of all, some of you are thinking, Oh, there's a time when murder would be perfectly appropriate.
No, if you turn your feelings into felonies, I'm not going to help you with that.
Okay.
That is not where we are going.
And that's not even what the word means, but I want to give you two examples where there is a time to kill.
When I was a kid, my dad had bird dogs.
And we love those dogs.
They were family pets as well as our hunting dogs.
And one of them got very old and very crippled.
And that dog that had loved to run so much was in pain.
It was the humane thing to do to put that animal down.
It was the right thing to do.
There was a time to take that life.
But on an even more important level, let me say this to you.
There are law enforcement officers in our church, in our community, and I want to say this.
There is a time, according to the book of Romans, that God entrusts government with the sword.
And there is a time, and it's horrible, and no police officer ever wants to do this.
But there is a time when for the protection of other people's lives, a law enforcement officer has to kill.
There is a time to kill.
And there are moments when that has to happen.
Solomon in his wisdom sees that, but let me give you another one that really, this one will really puzzle you down in verse eight.
There is a time to love and a time to hate.
Now, when we read that line and there is a time to love, like it's February, right?
Hey guys.
Next weekend's Valentine's Day.
Don't say you weren't warned.
Okay.
Make it happen.
All right.
There's a time to love.
And we kind of see it with those, with hearts, you know, balloons.
And that's okay.
But that next contrast is one that gets me.
Remember, these are like on a spectrum.
Love's over here.
Well, the opposite of that is hate.
There's a time to hate.
Well, you can't put that on the same spectrum because we're not talking about romantic love here and we're not talking about, well, there's a time to hate, like to hate somebody.
So, when is it appropriate to hate?
I don't know if you've seen any of this, but our Christian brothers and sisters in Nigeria in particular are suffering horrible persecution right now.
Islam continues to press its way south on the African continent,
And many of our African brothers and sisters, sometimes in churches, they're worshiping together and radical Islamic militants come into those places and you either convert or you're killed in that moment.
And our brothers and sisters are dying at times because they refuse to do that.
But you need to understand there is a difference between Christianity and Islam.
They're not just different regional religions.
Now do I want to convert people to Christianity?
Yes I do.
I will say that unapologetically.
I want people to leave whatever false philosophy and religion they believe in and come to true faith in Jesus Christ.
That's what I want.
And I have neighbors that are of different religions and I want them.
I love them and I want them to come to faith in Jesus.
But I do that by conversation.
Christianity is a religion of
conversion by conversation.
I speak the gospel to you.
I pray that you respond to the gospel that you give your life to Christ.
But if you don't, I don't hate you.
And I'm not going to do anything violent to you.
Islam, on the other hand, is a religion of conversion, not by conversation, but by compulsion.
At the end of a sword, you will either convert to Islam or you will die.
Let me tell you something.
I hate that.
And I will say that loudly in public and it's on video for everybody to see.
I hate what is happening to my Christian brothers and sisters in Nigeria.
So we will pray for them.
Let's do that.
You know what?
Let's just do it right now.
Father, our Christian brothers and sisters in the nation of Nigeria and other places,
are being persecuted and they are under pressure.
Would you protect them?
Would you give them strength and courage in this moment in Jesus' name?
Amen.
Now sovereignty, the sovereignty of God means that God is over everything.
And that's what Solomon is trying to help us understand in this passage of scripture.
And while God is sovereign over everything and his purpose will ultimately be done and it will prevail.
I do want you to understand something that while God is sovereign, he is not the author of sin.
Here's the truth.
God is sovereign and you are responsible.
God is sovereign.
He is almighty and all powerful.
And he does what he saw in one 15 three says our God is in heaven and he does what he pleases.
He is sovereign.
You on the other hand have a will.
Now, some people want to say free will.
I don't like that term.
I say you have a fallen will.
It's fallen in sin and it's bent towards sin.
It's not free.
You're not perfectly free because you're a sinner and I am too.
And while I am, while I have a will,
Here are two things that are true.
God is sovereign and in control, and His will is gonna be done.
His perfect purpose will come about.
At the same time, people make consequential choices.
Both of those things are true.
Two things can be true.
And they are both true.
God is not the author of sin.
God does not make everything happen.
That's fatalism.
That's not biblical Christianity.
It's not the Christian faith.
That God makes everything happen.
So let me help you out with this.
There's a time to be born and there is a time to die.
Some of you have endured the awful pain of suicide.
And you have looked at that passage, there is a time to be born and a time to die.
Did God decree that my loved one would do that?
The answer is unequivocally, absolutely 100%.
No, God did not decree that.
That's part of that fallen will, man's responsibility focus over here.
God had a perfect plan.
And if we make choices, we make bad choices.
There are moments.
When in those choices, we sometimes sidetrack what God wanted for our lives.
God is sovereign, but he is not the author of sin in James 1 13.
No one undergoing a trial should say I am being tempted by God since God is not tempted by evil and he himself does not tempt anyone.
Habakkuk chapter 1 verse 13 says, your eyes are too pure to look on evil and you cannot tolerate wrongdoing.
Some translations translate wrongdoing sin.
You cannot tolerate sin.
But here's the truth.
God takes even the bad things, the painful things, the sorrowful things, the regretful things.
And in his sovereignty, he can use them for good, for our good and for his glory.
That's what's confusing sometimes.
Let me give you the best example I've ever heard of this.
In World War II, the Nazis obviously were doing horrible things to Jewish people.
And when the Nazis rolled into the low countries of Northern Europe, there were Jews who were rounded up by the Nazis, but there was a family who
decided that while they were Christian and not Jewish, they were going to help these Jewish people.
And they had a secret room in their house that was hidden behind the headboard, and they would hide Jewish families in this little small area until they could get, help smuggle them out of the country.
Well, they did this for a couple of years and they helped several families and Jewish people to escape the concentration camps.
But one day one of their neighbors told the Nazis what they were doing and they came in and searched the house and found the hiding place.
Corey Tin Boom was a teenage girl and she actually after the war wrote the book The Hiding Place and told this story.
Well, when the Nazis found the hiding place, they not only found the family that was hiding there, they arrested
the Ten Boom family.
And Corey Ten Boom and her sister Betsy were sent off to a concentration camp.
The Nazis said, if you love these Jewish people so much, then you can go be with them.
They sent them to Ravensbrook, a concentration camp.
And normally when the Nazis put people in those concentration camps, they took every belonging they had, took their jewelry off of them for some reason
They left a little brooch on a necklace that Corey Ten Boom had on.
They didn't take it from her.
And inside that was a tiny copy of the New Testament.
And she kept that.
She kept it secret.
If it had been found, they'd confiscated it immediately.
So they get into this barracks and the Nazis, like if it was supposed to hold 50 people, they'd put 150 women in there.
It was awful.
The first night Corey 10 boom laid down.
She started to itch.
Oh, she started to itch because the lice and the bed bugs were biting her.
It was awful.
It was horrible.
Well, Corey and Betsy decide if we're in this awful place, then let's start a Bible study.
We've got a Bible.
So they start a Bible study.
And they were scared every night when they started this Bible study and they read just a little bit and they gathered those Jewish women around them and they would read the Bible and they would talk about it and some of those women came to faith in Christ.
Many of them died in those concentration camps.
They were scared to death every night that the Nazi guards were gonna burst into that particular barracks and they're gonna find them doing this Bible study.
They're gonna confiscate the Bible.
They're gonna kill them if they find them doing this.
But for some reason, for the entire time that they were in Ravensbrook, no Nazi guard ever came into their barracks.
They went into every other one.
Sometimes in the middle of the night, they would empty them out in the cold winter, shoeless and just in rags and they'd almost freeze to death and then they'd put them back in the barracks.
But they never came in theirs after the war.
And by the way, Betsy died about four weeks before they were rescued from Ravensbrook.
and the allies liberated them.
But after the war, Corey Ten Boom was actually introduced to a guard at Ravensbrook.
And he asked her for forgiveness and she extended it.
And she said, I have to ask you a question though.
You know, we were doing these Bible studies and he had read her book and he said, yes, you were doing the Bible studies.
We didn't know that.
She said, but I need to understand one thing.
Why is it that you guys always went into every other barracks?
You had emptied them out in the middle of the night, but you never interrupted our Bible study.
We were scared to death.
You were going to do that.
And he said, Oh, we knew that barracks.
No German would have ever walked in there for fear of getting all the lice and all the bed bugs that were in there.
You see God built a wall of protection around a Bible study with lice.
And God can take
the worst of the worst, and he can use it for his glory and for your good.
His plan is wise, even bad things have a purpose.
You need to remember that.
Remember too.
And I'll move faster through the next ones.
God's plan is mysterious.
You won't figure it all out.
You're not going to.
Verse 11, He has made everything appropriate
in its time.
He has also put eternity in their hearts.
But no one can discover the work God has done from beginning to end.
He has made everything appropriate.
Some translations translate this.
He has made everything beautiful.
No.
Beautiful is not the best word to use there.
Not all things are beautiful.
Some of the things that happen to us are downright ugly.
But he's saying that God can take these horrible things and make them appropriately fit into our lives.
And then he says, Solomon writes that he has put eternity in our hearts.
There is something within you that cannot imagine not being.
You cannot
have a thought that says, I cease to exist, I'm nothing.
Do you know what that is?
That's the fact that God has done something in the human beings that he did not do for anything else in his creation.
And that is that he set eternity in your heart.
There is something in you that says there's more than just this life.
There's more than this moment.
There's something beyond this life.
And then he says, while eternity is set in our hearts, no one can discover the work God has done from beginning to end.
Now, do you get pieces of it?
Do you see everything?
Oh, that's what God was doing.
Every now and then we'll see those moments in our lives.
And maybe it'll be something that puzzled us at first.
And then, and then you go down the road a little bit and hindsight's 20, 20, you know, and you go, oh, that's why God allowed that to happen in my life.
That's why I took that turn instead of I went to the left instead of the right or whatever it may be.
Yeah, you'll get those little glimpses, but no one will ever figure it out from beginning then.
So we're confused when hardship,
And when difficulty comes into our life, as a matter of fact, I think most of us would echo a man named Gideon.
Gideon in the Old Testament is one of the judges of Israel.
In the book of judges, his life is given to us.
And there's this moment when he's like from the smallest tribe, and he's not a great man, a man of great wealth, or a man of great strength,
and an angel appears to him and he comes before him and he says, the angel tells him, the Lord is with you.
And Gideon responds to that by saying in Judges 6, 13, oh my Lord, if the Lord is with us, why has all this happened to us?
And where are all his miracles which our fathers told us about?
God, why aren't you doing
for us what you did for them.
God, why?
If you are with us, why has all this happened to us?
Some of you came through the doors of this church this morning and in your mind, you're like, I'm going to church.
I still believe in God, but I don't understand what he's doing.
If the Lord is with me, why has all this happened to me?
I've asked Chris to help me out this morning to help you understand this.
And that is, how would you know how to dance if you'd never mourned?
How would you know to weep or to laugh if you'd never wept?
I've asked Chris to play a song that you're recognizing
with only the white keys.
Now, you recognize that melody.
Most of you do at least.
Jesus loves me, right?
It's simple, but it's just flat.
But what if Chris added in the black keys?
How would it sound if he added in the sharps and the flats?
Thank you, Chris.
You see, you recognized it with only the white keys.
But it was better when he added the sharps and the flats.
Let me tell you something.
Life needs the black keys.
We don't like that.
I don't like the fact that I struggle sometimes.
But if there weren't moments of pain and problems, and there also wouldn't be moments of victory and courage in life,
The greatest stories of life are stories of struggle when people have been up against the wall or against the odds, and those are the stories of heroism.
And in our lives, you see, God can take the pain and the problems and weave them together.
You have to have the black keys.
His plan is mysterious.
You won't figure it all out.
Number three, God's plan is perfect.
So don't let worry ruin your life.
Look at verse 12.
I know that there is nothing better for them than to rejoice and enjoy the good life.
It is also the gift of God whenever anyone eats, drinks and enjoys all his efforts.
Solomon says, here's what you need to do.
Receive life as a gift.
God's plan is perfect.
Relax and rest in his sovereignty.
Yes, there are moments to savor in this life.
But there are also moments when we're anxious in this life.
Listen to the words of Jesus in Matthew chapter six, verse 34.
So do not worry about tomorrow for tomorrow will care for itself.
Each day has enough trouble of its own.
Solomon is not giving over to hedonism here.
We talked about that when he says to eat and drink.
What he's saying is to enjoy the moments that God gives you and don't be anxious about what he's up to.
A lot of times people get really, I think really wrought up, especially younger people.
So let me talk to my high school, junior high and my college students, maybe you and your 20s for just a couple of minutes.
Every now and then somebody in your age group will come to me and through the course of my ministry, they've come to me and they've said things like, I've got to choose a college.
And I'm really anxious about choosing where to go to school or if to go to school.
What should I do?
And I want to do God's will and I don't know which one I'm supposed to go to.
And then they'll say something like this.
I think I'll probably meet my future husband or wife wherever I go to college.
And what if I go to this college and
I make the mistake and they go to that college.
And I'm really worried about that.
And by the way, some of that's by the way informed by a terrible theology that you've got one soulmate in the world you're supposed to marry.
And if you miss that person, your life's ruined.
Please, no, that's not true, but that's not even sermon, but that was free.
Okay.
So, but we get so wrought up in like, if I make one bad turn here,
that I'm going to mess up God's will for my life.
Let me say this to you, I want you to hear this really clearly.
If you are honestly seeking God, you can't mess it up beyond His fixing it.
You can't.
So pray about it, seek God about it, and go where you wanna go to school.
That's what you do.
That's God's will for you.
If you wanna join the army, if you think about joining the army, join the air force, seek it, seek God's will, pray about it.
If that's what he wants you to do, then go do it.
If you feel that, God absolutely is sovereign, so relax.
Don't be so stressed out.
In the words of that great theologian, Morgan Wallin, spend more time talking to the dealer than worrying about the hand I'm built.
God's plan is perfect, so don't worry, let worry ruin your life.
Finally, God's plan, God's purpose will happen, so rest in His sovereignty.
Verse 14, I know that everything God does will last forever.
There is no adding to it or taking from it.
I love that light, I love that.
God works so that people will be in awe of Him.
That's what He does.
Everything he does will last.
Now what I build is a house of cards.
It'll collapse.
The best of my efforts will decay or burn or be gone someday.
But what God does will last forever.
And Solomon, by the way, was a builder.
He built the temple.
He built a palace for himself.
He built fortifications.
He was a builder, but he knew everything that he built would someday be under a heap of sand and archeologists would dig it up.
It would not last forever.
But what God builds will last forever.
You go, but Bob, what about these parts that I just don't understand?
I don't get it.
Well, in verse 15 of this passage, the last verse I'm gonna read to you,
In the New American Standard Bible, it says this.
It says whatever has already has been, whatever will be.
However, God seeks what has been passed by.
God seeks what has been passed by.
Let me tell you what that means.
There are pieces of your life that don't make sense.
And it doesn't feel like they fit.
And you don't understand why God let that happen.
You don't understand.
why you experienced that pain, why you experienced that persecution, that injustice in your life.
My wife and her family have a hobby, a little activity that they do around the holidays, like Thanksgiving and Christmas and stuff like that.
They put together puzzles.
Now I'm just going to tell you something.
I find that to be the most tedious, boring thing in all of the world, put together a puzzle.
If a puzzle's got more than 12 pieces, I'm not putting it together.
But they love this.
They get like a thousand piece puzzle that's got some kind of rocky mountain landscapes, got every color in the palette.
I don't know how you're going to put this thing together.
Well, they start, those of you put together, you know, you start with the corners, get those corner pieces, got to have that.
And you get the straight lines, you kind of get to frame it and then you start putting things in.
But sometimes there's a piece and it just does not make sense.
It does not make sense.
You know what they do with that piece?
They lay it over the side.
And they put together the pieces that do make sense, the pieces that do fit.
But they get down that thousand piece puzzle to about five pieces.
There's only five little spots left.
And then they go back to that which has been passed by.
And then it makes sense and it fits.
When it comes to how you've been treated unfairly and life has dealt you a raw deal.
And things have not gone the way you wanted them to go.
Just take that peace and laid over the side.
Someday God will seek after that, which has been passed by and he'll make it make sense.
Now it may not be in this life.
It may be when you get to heaven, but you're going to see God's purpose.
By the way, some of you feel like I've been mistreated.
There's been injustice.
You do understand this, right?
that the person on planet earth who endured the greatest injustice and unfairness that has ever been was Jesus.
He perfectly obeyed the law of God morally and spiritually.
He did nothing to deserve death.
He was absolutely morally and spiritually perfect.
And yet
He was delivered over to death, beaten beyond recognition before they nailed him hand and feet to a cross, crushed a crown of thorns into his skull, and he died in the cruelest way possible.
Now there are two things about that that always get my attention.
One is that God brought our great salvation out of the greatest injustice ever committed.
But here's the second thing.
It was all God's plan all along.
Acts chapter 2 verse 23.
Peter is preaching his sermon on Pentecost and he says this, this man, he's referring to Jesus, this man
delivered over by the predetermined plan and foreknowledge of God.
You nailed to the cross by the hands of Godless men and put him to death.
But God raised him up again, putting an end to the agony of death, since it was impossible for him to be held by its power.
He was delivered over by the predetermined or predestined and foreknowledge of God.
The cross, this horrible injustice, was God's plan all along to bring about your salvation.
God can bring purpose out of pain.
He can bring meaning out of chaos.
For we know this, that God causes all things to work together for good to those who love Him and are called according to His purpose.
You have been listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wigital Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, including gathering times and locations, click the link in the show notes or go to fbcwf.org.
We'll see you next week.